
Interviewer: Chris Gwilliams

Interviewee: Gill Bolongon



Interviewee: First, your name

Interviewee: My full name is Gill Bolongon

Interviewer: Bolongon?

Interviewee: Yeah

Interviewer: And what species are you looking at?

Interviewee: Uh, my main species is, of course, the Bornean Clouded Leopard. Neofelis diardi. 

Interviewer: OK. And, what is your project title?

Interviewee: My project title is: Codes (400-498)
Project Info
The population density and the demographic of the Sundar Clouded Leopardin a fragmented ecosystem

Interviewer: Sundar?

Interviewee: Yes, Sundar Clouded Leopard

Interviewer: What is the difference between a Sundar Clouded Leopard and a Bornean Clouded Leopard? Are they the same?

Interviewee: Uh, that is the same. The only difference is the Mainland Clouded Leopard is different to the Bornean Clouded Leopard because the Mainland Clouded Leopard is the species and the Bornean Clouded Leopard has been reclassified as a new subspecies to the Mainland Clouded Leopard.

Interviewer: What is the difference, do you know?

Interviewee: Uh, in general, they have a lot of differences, but I cannot tell because I am not an expert in genetics. But, if you see really close to the Mainland Clouded Leopard, they tend to a big spot.

Interviewer: Bigger spots?

Interviewee: Yeah.

Interviewee: So, yeah, Codes (1294-1365)
Species info Weight: 5/10
the Mainland have bigger spot compared to the Bornean Clouded Leopard.

Interviewer: OK, right, so, next question: What collection/analysis do you do? Do you take physical samples? Do you camera trap? Do you monitor? Do you physically track them? 

Interviewee: No, uh, for my project, my raw data is gonna be the picture only. So, I am not gonna collect live scats and things like that.

Interviewer: OK, and your target areas?

Interviewee: My target area is gonna be the Lower Kinabatangan Wildlife Sanctuary, starting from the Pin Supu forest reserve B to the Bilit area.

Interviewer: Pin Supu?

Interviewee: Pin. P-i-n. Space. S-u-p-u.

Interviewer: Yeah, forest reserve B. 

Interviewer: Forest reserve to Bilet?

Interviewee: Yeah, to Bilet. 

Interviewer: B-i-l-e-t.

Interviewee: B-i-l-i-t.

Interviewer: OK, and how many cameras do you have for that?

Interviewee: So, I have 90 pieces of camera.

Interviewer: 90 Reconyx cameras?

Interviewee: Yeah, Reconyx camera. But, in my study, I have a total of 90 sites of camera, each site has a pair of cameras.

Interviewer: So you have a pair, so that's 45.

Interviewee: Yeah.

Interviewer: So you have how many sites in total? 90?

Interviewee: 90. Yeah.

Interviewer: So you have 45 sites and then you move to another area?

Interviewee: Move to another area, yes. 

Interviewer: How long do they stay at one site?

Interviewee: Uh, 40 days. Not including the setting up period.

Interviewer: Yep. How long is the setting up period?

Interviewee: Uh, Codes (2780-2888)
Project Info
it depends on the physical. Normally, to set up 45 sites. I need at least 2 months, or something like that.

Interviewer: Really?

Interviewee: Yeah, from the first camera out, to the last camera. At least 2 months.

Interviewer: Why does it take so long?

Interviewee: Because Codes (3054-3490)
Project Info
normally you can see my coverage area is 150km^2. Mostly in the middle of the forest. It takes time because you need to do a lot of cutting to reach the point. So, especially with the conditions of the Lower Kinabtangan footplain, it is watery, it is muddy, there is a lot of mosquitos. Makes you work slower, at least for the river. If a location is more than 1km from the river, that is one day's work. Rougly, one day is one camera.

Interviewer: And you did a smilar project for 4 years, before doing this project?

Interviewee: Yes.

Interviewer: So, 4 years prior experience. In those 4 years, did you ever not have a pair of cameras in one site? Did you ever just have 1 camera?

Interviewee: Yes, I did.

Interviewer: Why did that change?

Interviewee: That is because of broken cameras and we did not have a replacement. So we have to leave a camera as just one.

Interviewer: When you started it 4 years ago, did you always have a pair of cameras?

Interviewee: Yep.

Interviewer: And that was so you could identify the animal, from both sides?

Interviewee: Yes. That is part of the methodology. 

Interviewer: How did you discover to do that? Was it just knowledge that you couldn't just identify from one side?

Interviewee: Yeah, Codes (4286-4605)
Previous Knowledge
this is also because of previous research that had been conducted by Karen, guys from India and then he suggested that it is better to have both sides. Because, the pattern of the animal on both sides is different, so you cannot ID the animal with just one side. So, the idea of this is based on the previous research.

Interviewer: So, the sites that you have now, from Pin Supu to Bilit, how have you chosen these sites?

Interviewee: Codes (4721-4837)
Project Info
I have chosen these based on the region, the human natural trails, the existing logging road and also the rigeline.

Interviewer: Codes (4850-5005)
Previous
And you know this, is this from the last 4 years that you have found from where you placed the cameras, these are the more popular sites?

Interviewee: Yes.

Interviewer: That is 4 years of pictures?

Interviewee: Yes.

Interviewer: So, with the sites that you had for the 4 years, were there cameras that never picked up Clouded Leopards?

Interviewer: Yes. 

Interviewer: What did you do with those? Did you move them?

Interviewee: Uh, no. This is also because of the method. You need to cover the whole area with a camera. Trying to avoid holes, with any chances for the animal to miss the camera.

Interviewer: So, in your 45 sites that you have. You try and cover every human trail, every logging road and every ridgeline?

Interviewee: Yes.

Interviewer: And on the ridgelines, what clouded leopards did you say were more popular?

Interviewee: Male. Always the male. 

Interviewer: You never see the female?

Interviewee: Of course we do, it is lesser than the male.

Interviewer: So, Clouded Leopards are classified as nocturnal animals. But we have found, from the pictures taken here, that they can come out throughout the day, have youf found that as well?

Interviewee: Uh, yeah.Codes (6027-6376)
Species info Weight: 5/10
Local
 From what I notice, that is why I chose to be here for my project. Because, different to other places, or forest reserves that we have been in, most of the pictures of the Clouded Leopard is nocturnal. But here, it is not really obvious. Something makes it different here. So, we still do not know why. Maybe because of the landscape, or whatever.

Interviewer: So, these pictures will help?

Interviewee: A better understanding of why they are like that, yes.

Interviewer: So, these sites are based on previous research?

Interviewee: Yes

Interviewer: As well as other things you were doing with the Clouded Leopard?

Interviewee: Yes

Interviewer: Who is involved in that previous research?

Interviewee: A PhD candidate from Oxford University, Andrew James Hearn. And also, some of our research assistants have been involved with this. For example, Onasis Nuhngo. 

Interviewer: And who do they work for?

Interviewee: They work with that Andy as full-time research assistants, by checking and collecting data from the cameras.

Interviewer: So, when I arrived, there was Andy, you and Fernando?

Interviewee: Fernando, yes.

Interviewer: And Fernando is working with you on this project?

Interviewee: Yes. He is.

Interviewer: Ok, so, we know Clouded Leopards here are not nocturnal, but we are not sure why. Are there any other things? I.e. in terms of weather conditions, are there things that impact pictures for you? Like, do you know that if a site is flooded, or if it is too hot, or if the moon is too bright? Does that impact anything?

Interviewee: From now, no, I do not think they have specific conditions that impact them.

Interviewer: So, the only thing that the weather affects is you accessing the sites?

Interviewee: Yeah. 

Interviewer: So, if it is raining, or if the river is too high. What do you do with your sites? Do you leave them slightly longer?

Interviewee: Yeah, normally, I choose the sites to avoid that. Normally, I choose an area that is a bit higher than the rest. 

Interviewer: Speaking of the Clouded Leopard species in general, what specifics do you know of the animal. So, if I said to you, describe a Clouded Leopard. What would it do at certain times? Would it come out at night? Talking about the Clouded Leopard in this area, as well as all of the ones you have researched previously. Does it avoid certain locations? Does it frequent certain locations?

Interviewee: From what I notice, one: tCodes (8452-8779)
Species info Weight: 5/10
Global
he Clouded Leopard is a very territorial animal, so they are trying to avoid each other. This is based on the camera traps, as well. Normally, for an area, we get a dominant male, the other males tend to use the area less. But, for the female, they do make contact with the males, but that may be because of the mating season.

Interviewer: What is their mating season, do you know?

Interviewee: Oh no, I have no idea. Uh, that is just by guessing. People from previous research, they believe that, iCodes (8951-9129)
Previous
f the male comes to the territory where the other males are, they believe that is the mating season. But, they still cannot pinpoint the time that is the mating season for them.

Interviewer: And, from the research again, human trails, that is where you know are the most common trails they use. What kind of prey do they have? What do they eat?

Interviewee: OK, so, I think a month ago. Andrew Hearn and Budin. This is the first time that they managed to capture a picture of a Clouded Leopard hunting a long tailed macaque. On that occasion, the Clouded Leopard killed the long-tailed macaque and left the body. Later on, Andy came back with a camera trap and placed it near the body, getting a picture of the Clouded Leopard coming back. So, generally, the Codes (9710-9788)
Species info Weight: 5/10
Clouded Leopard's main diet is the primate and, also, other small carnivores.

Interviewer: Do they have any predators? Does anything eat them?

Interviewee: From what I know now, no? 

Interviewer: So, they are the more dominant predator?

Interviewee: Yes, dominant predator.

Interviewer: Cool, so not including the four years that you worked with Andy. This project now, how long are you here for, carrying out the practical side? 

Interviewee: OK, so I am going to be here at least 2 years. 

Interviewer: 2 years.

Interviewee: Yeah, the reason is because I need to repeat my density survey throughout this year and the following year.

Interviewer: To see if there is a difference?

Interviewee: Yeah, this is because Codes (10426-10562)
Project Info
I need to see if it is the seasonality that affects the density of the animal. Either, they move away to other place or they stay here.

Interviewer: In terms of the research that you do here, the pictures that you take, will anyone else at the field centre, or others (like Andy), use your research?

Interviewee: My research is also part of Danau Girang research, but it is still part of my Masters project, so it is still private for me. But, it is not a problem for me to share to someone else, if they want to produce a small paper, or something like that, I am willing to give it to them as long as they put me as an author.

Interviewer: As long as they acknowledge you. So, if someone else here was doing a Clouded Leopard project, you would share the pictures?

Interviewee: Yes, of course.

Interviewer: That's good, so you share resources?

Interviewee: Yep.

Interviewer: And you check the cameras, how often?

Interviewee: It depends on the camera. For those cameras I put on the human trails, I need at least 3 weeks to check. But for locations that are far in the forest. I try and limit the field work and visit once a month.

Interviewer: So, once a month for more difficult sites? Is that because they are just harder to get to? It is a lot of work and it is tiring?

Interviewee: Yeah, that is one of the reasons and the battery life of these Reconyx is very good. Codes (11800-11977)
Local
We have a record of them being left for 3 months, with a thousand pictures taken, but the battery is still at 30%. You can really rely on the battery for these kinds of camera.

Interviewer: And that is the PC-800?

Interviewee: Yes.

Interviewer: So, the pictures they are taking, they are not time critical? You do not need to know as soon as a Clouded Leopard has been found, you just need to know that a Clouded Leopard is in the area? 

Interviewee: Yeah.

Interviewer: You do not need to know within a minute? You just want to know how many are in the area, how many individuals? Is that right?

Interviewee: Yes and also because part of the method of my density is a close population. So, in close population, after a certain amount of time, I have to consider that there is no animals going in or out. So, I have to make sure that I use 40 days for each site. The time frame is important to ensure a close population.

Interviewer: So, you will try and count the number of individuals? 

Interviewee: Within 40 days, I will count the individuals that I get.

Interviewer: With the project that you have now, hae you used any other research or knowledge from the previous project with Andy, or others in the field centre?

Interviewee: Uh, yeah, mostly,Codes (13050-13319)
Previous Knowledge
Project Info
 the sites that I have chosen are based on working with Andy and also from other research around the world, especially, for those working with Clouded Leopard in the tropical rainforest and when I read their papers, they also suggest putting cameras on the ridgeline. 

Interviewer: So, it is validation.

Interviewee: Yeah.

Interviewer: OK, that is cool. So, final lead on question. You said that if someone else came here and did a Clouded Leopard project then you would share resources. If, because there is a small group of researchers here, so you know of all the projects (like Danica looking into Proboscis monkeys), if you went through your camera trap pictures and you found pictures of animals that others were researching, is that something you would share? As long as you were acknowledged accordingly?

Interviewee: Yes. 

Interviewer: That is fair enough. Like they do now, with Danau Girang sharing the pictures taken by the collective camera traps.

Interviewee: And also I am going to use their data as part of my project. I have 45 sites, actually I have 40 sites. But, because of the corridor monitoring project, I have an extra 5 cameras, because there is no need to double up as Danau Girang already covers that. So, I just loan the data from them and I can increase my coverage.

Interviewer: So, yuo share your data with Danau Girang and they share it with you? And all the data they have from being open for 5 years, you can access? And any new data that you find, you share?

Interviewee: Yeah.

Interviewer: Excellent, thanks Gill.

Interviewee: Thank you, Chris. You are welcome.

